# Diabetic-Retinopathy-Detection


Diabetic retinopathy is an eye disease, in which damage occurs to the retina due to diabetes. The longer a person has diabetes and the less controlled the blood sugar, the higher the chances of developing diabetic retinopathy. Diabetic retinopathy is the most prevalent cause of avoidable vision impairment and a major cause of blindness. Because diabetic retinopathy has no early warning signs and can only be effectively treated if it is detected early enough, a regular examination from an eye care professional is very important. Regular screening is very expensive, time consuming and sometimes unreliable. The recognition of diabetic retinopathy is very challenging due to the subtle differences among the individual grades of diabetic retinopathy. Moreover, many small but significant features exist. Therefore, the importance of automatic methods for diabetic retinopathy detection has been recognized.
Diabetic retinopathy is divided into two stages. The first stage is called non-proliferative diabetic retinopathy (NPDR). In this stage, blockages of tiny blood vessels lead to insufficient blood supply. Tiny bulges, so called microaneurysms, protrude from the vessel walls. Sometimes, this causes fluid and blood to leak into the retina. Blurred vision, darkened or distorted sight that is different in both eyes as well as vision loss are typical symptoms in this stage. The only way to detect non-proliferative diabetic retinopathy is by fundus photography or fluorescein angiography. In the former, microaneurysms can be seen. The latter shows narrowing or blocked blood vessels.

The second stage is called proliferative diabetic retinopathy (PDR). In this stage abnormal new blood vessels form at the back of the eye. These can burst and bleed because new
blood vessels are very fragile. This causes so called haemorrhages. Specks of blood or spots floating in a person’s visual field are typical symptoms in this stage. Fundus photography examination can help to identify cotton wool spots, flame- and dot-blot haemorrhages. The progress of diabetic retinopathy can be classified into four stages: mild, moderate, severe (non-proliferative) diabetic retinopathy, and the stages of advanced (proliferative) diabetic retinopathy. In the mild stage of NPDR, microaneurysms, small areas in the blood vessels of the retina, begin to swell. In moderate NPDR, multiple microaneurysms and haemorrhages arise, which prevents blood from flowing into the retina. The severe stage of NPDR shows the presence of many new blood vessels. The worst stage of diabetic retinopathy is the proliferative stage. In this stage, fragile new blood vessels and scar tissue form on the retina, leading to blood leaking and finally to permanent vision loss. 

At present, an eye care professional manually looks for leaking blood vessels, retinal swelling, exudates (pale, fatty deposits on the retina that are signs of leaking blood vessels) and any changes in the blood vessels in fundus photography. Due to the manual nature of diabetic retinopathy detection, results are heavily based on the experience of the professional. Therefore results are highly inconsistent, thus making automatic diabetic retinopathy diagnosis essential for solving such difficulties.
